Setting the initial user name and password

  Because Zope is managed through the web, user names and passwords must be
  used to assure that only authorized people can make changes to a Zope
  installation.

  Some user name and password is needed to "bootstrap" the creation of
  normal managers of your Zope site.  This is accomplished through the
  use of the file 'inituser'.  The first time Zope starts, it will detect
  that no users have been defined in the root user folder.  It will search
  for the 'inituser' file and, if it exists, will add the user defined
  in the file to the root user folder.

  Normally, 'inituser' is created by the Zope install scripts.  Either
  the installer prompts for the password or a randomly generated
  password is created and displayed at the end of the build script.

  You can use the 'zpasswd.py' script to create 'inituser' yourself.
  Execute 'zpasswd.py' like this::

    python zpasswd.py inituser

  The script will prompt you for the name, password, and allowed
  domains.  The default is to encode the password with SHA, so please
  remember this password as there is no way to recover it (although
  'zpasswd.py' lets you reset it.)

  In some situations you may need to bypass normal security controls
  because you have lost your password or because the security settings
  have been mixed up.  Zope provides a facility called an "emergency
  user" so that you can reset passwords and correct security
  settings.

  The emergency user password must be defined outside the application
  user interface.  It is defined in the 'access' file located
  in the Zope directory.  It should be readable only by the user
  as which your web server runs.

  To create the emergency user, use 'zpasswd.py' to create the
  'access' file like this::

    python zpasswd.py access

  In order to provide a somewhat higher level of security, various
  encoding schemes are supported which provide access to either SHA-1
  encryption or the standard UNIX crypt facility if it has been compiled
  into Python.  Unless you have some special requirements (see below), 
  you should use the SHA-1 facility, which is the default.

Format of 'inituser' and 'access'

  A password file should consist of a single line of the form:

    name:password

  Note that you may also add an optional third component to the line
  in the access file to restrict access by domain.
  For example, the line:

    mario:nintendoRules:*.mydomain.com
 
  in your 'access' file will only allow permit emergency user access
  from *.mydomain.com machines. Attempts to access the system from
  other domains will fail, even if the correct emergency user name
  and password are used.

  Please note that if you use the ZServer monitor capability, you will
  need to run with a clear text password.

Setting permissions on the var directory.

  You need to set permissions on the Zope var directory.
  Zope needs to read and write data from its var directory. Before
  running Zope you should ensure that you give adequate permissions
  to the Zope var directory for the userid Zope will run under.

  Depending on how you choose to run Zope you will need to give
  different permissions to the var directory.  If you use Zope with an
  existing web server, it will probably run Zope as 'nobody'. In this
  case 'nobody' needs read and write permissions to the var directory.

  If you change the way you run Zope you may need to modify the permissions
  of the var directory and the files in it to allow Zope to read and write
  under its changed userid.

