The Zope Object Database, ZODB, version 3.0

  ZODB is the next generation of our object database architecture.
  It provides a number of advantages over or existing databases:

  - Support for concurrency,

  - Well-defined storage management interface that will allow many
    different storage management strategies to be used, from file
    storage, to RDBMS storage, to memory storage,

  - More robust file storage format,

  - Much better version support and integrations of 
    versions with the transaction system.  For example,
    it is possible to commit from one version to another, 
    to undo version commit and abort, and to use "temporary
    versions" to reduce memory use when manipulating large
    quantities of data.

  - Support for multiple databases in the same object system. 

  - Support for multi-process storage managers, although the
    standard distribution will not include any multiple process
    storage managers.

  Note: Using ZODB 3 from Python

    In ZODB 2, you could access the top-level application object
    with::

      import Main
      app=Main.app

    You could then navigate from the top-level object by getting
    attributes, calling methods, etc..

    In ZODB 3, you get the top-level object like this::

      import Zope
      app=Zope.app()

      ... do stuff with objects

      # and when you're done:
      app._p_jar.close()

    You have to import the Zope application module, which uses
    ZODB 3 rather than ZODB 2.  In ZODB 3, you have to get a
    connection to a database before you access an object.  The
    'app()' function combines opening a connection and getting the
    top level object.  When your done using the top-level object
    (or any objects accessible from it) you can close the database
    connection by calling the 'close' method on the '_p_jar'
    attribute, which is the database connection.  You don't need
    to close the connection if you are going to exit Python
    without doing any more work.

    Don't forget to::

      get_transaction().commit()

    If you want any changes to made to be saved.

  Note: Converting ZODB 2 (aka BoboPOS) data files to ZODB 3.

    The bbb.py script in utilities can be used to convert data
    files from ZODB 2 to ZODB 3 format::

      utilities/bbb.py -f output_file input_file

    Here's a example::

       utilities/bbb.py -f var/Data.fs var/Data.bbb

	You can also convert export files from ZODB 2 by inclding the
    -x option::

       utilities/bbb.py -x -f output.zexp input.bbe

  ZODB 3 and Zope Database Adapters

    Most database adapters are *currently* likely to be problematic unless
    the underlying extensions and libraries:
	
      - allow multiple simultaneous database connections,
	
      - are thread safe,
	
      - give up the Python global interpreter lock when
        making database calls.
	
    This is only a problem when running Zope 2 with multiple
    threads.

  ZODB 3 Futures

    These are features that are lkely to wait for releases after 2.0. 

    - Multiple database support

    - OPTIMIZATION: FileStorage will get a more efficient data
      structure for maintaining index information and key methods
      in the ZODB framework will move to C.
